Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll. Here's a classic question
What is the use of education? What is the value of being educated?
I'm thinking particularly here of post secondary post high school education college university
Even graduate school and so on. Why do this? Why get that much schooling into you?
There are you know lofty
Answers to this question about becoming a more well-rounded human being
Understanding the human condition picking up reasoning skills and learning skills. There's also
Socialization issues right meeting people getting to know the world in a certain way
That's absolutely an important function of going to college
But there's also a lot of down-to-earth practical issues, right? You're being trained
Perhaps for a trade for a job to become employable. That's an absolutely valid
reason to get an education in the modern world, especially we point toward science and technology as
Skills or fields for which we would like it if people had good training in these fields, right?
We invent the acronym of STEM
Science technology engineering and mathematics. This is government speak or education speak for
the kinds of sciencey techy kinds of areas that
Both governments and also employers place a lot of emphasis on so if you're not within academia right now
You might not know that there's a lot of hand-wringing and angst about the decline of the humanities and you know the more
classic parts of the broad-based humanistic education that we purport to care about and too much emphasis maybe is being put on
science degrees and
Related areas, but there are good reasons economic reasons
You know you want people to get a good job that's able to pay them and you give them a fulfilling life after
College so maybe it's fine to have a bunch of people specializing in STEM areas
Today's guest is John Screntany. He's a sociologist at UC San Diego and actually someone I've known for a long time
We went to graduate school at the same time together and used to play basketball together as you'll find out if you hang out for the very end here
But he's written an interesting book called wasted education how we fail our graduates in science technology
engineering and math the idea behind John's book is
sure employers and governments want
healthy and rapidly growing
Scientifically and technologically educated workforce, but does that mean that once created that workforce is actually fulfilled?
Is are they happy do you get a science degree and are you there for able to get a good job that keeps you?
Having a good kind of life and the answer
Not always certainly, but in a growing number of cases the answer is no
So it's a it's a very interesting argument
I mean we have to say over and over again and John will say very explicitly in the podcast of course
certain individuals
Get very rewarding careers out of science education
But we also have to take into account those that don't and we're not primarily talking here about people who go into academia
We even want to go into academia. We're talking about tech workers
Which is a huge fraction of the people who go from STEM degrees into the workforce. They work for
computing
technology software engineering kind of
corporations and
It can be a tough road to hoe as a matter of fact
For one thing novelty and innovation is of course
valued it turns out for various reasons that we'll discuss that it can be easier to just
Get rid of your workers and hire newer younger ones
Rather than retraining the existing workers the new workers already have the skills, right?
They just learn them they're fresh in their minds that they're cheaper and then a decade or two later
They can be fired and they can be replaced. It might not actually be a
Sustainable way to think about our workforce or what it means to be a scientist or what it means for
Colleges and universities to do their students a good service by providing them with an education
Harder to come up with solutions to this issue than to diagnose it
Certainly very deep features of capitalism and our economic and political system are involved here
But it's an important issue to highlight one way or the other
We need to know what we're doing when we're training people in these
Different areas that I personally value very much
But we have to be explicit what to be conscious of what's happening. We can't just say oh science is good
Therefore do it we have to look into what happens when we try to do that
So I think it's not exactly what we usually talk about here on Minescape. It's sociology
It's an important part of the liberal arts spectrum. So let's go
I
Don scrappney welcome to the Minescape podcast
Happy to be here. I'm excited to talk to you Sean, you know since we're old friends
I thought I would start you off with a couple of soft balls to get the ball rolling here as it were
So what is this stem acronym and why is it a terrible acronym?
Actually compared to the alternatives, it's it's pretty awesome
So do you prefer stem over smet? I prefer not using an acronym. Oh, okay
Well, I gotta tell you the government has been searching for an acronym for quite a while
And and that's because they've been trying to count people in these fields for quite a while
Really since the Cold War. Yeah, I in the book. I include a
A New York Times story in which there's this panicky headline in the New York Times
About how the United States is falling behind the Soviet Union in the number of technicians
Would you would you prefer that probably not probably not they were talking about scientists and engineers
The National Science Foundation has scientists and engineers or s and e s ampersand e so not exactly that
that
Euphonious
one might say but it appears so often in the
Educational context and like no one majors in technology. That's not a thing, right?
You can major in science engineering or math. They're very different from each other
So I don't like lumping right together. So I kind of like using words rather than acronyms. Yeah. Yeah, so the technology
I saw a government report that used the acronym set science engineering and technology
So people really like technology. Sorry. They might know that and then there was and then there was some use of smet science math
Engineering and technology and that had a rationale to it where science and math are the foundations of engineering and technology
so it you know by putting them first that's sort of
kind of a
Temporal ordering of what comes first you do the basic science you understand the math and then you develop
The technology, but smet sounds like not I'm on a Pia, right? Yes, it's not bad
Yeah, oh my god a smet
so it didn't really catch on and then a
Judith Romley is her name. She was one of the higher-ups at the National Science Foundation
She apparently is the one who coined the stem acronym
just changing the order a little bit making it sound a little bit better and
Then it just took off. I I had a graduate student kind of look who's doing research assistance for me and
She looked at the rise of the stem acronym and it just started to appear in
bills in Congress and it just took off and so you may not like stem but a
lot of other people like it that is and
It's a much more detailed and serious answer than I was hoping for so
we're kind of stuck with it and and
What exactly it means? That's it. That's a different question, but but stem seems to have taken off internationally people use that acronym
They seem to understand when I talk to them about stem
So it's stem seems to be here to stay does it include the social sciences
That's a good question
The National Science Foundation officially includes social scientists in its
understandings of SNE science and engineering and then they also talk about stem we could go down a very tedious
rabbit hole about some of this but they
idiosyncratically I would say include social scientists because when most of the government policy makers are talking about
Stem they're not thinking about me. Yeah, they're thinking about you
They're thinking about a lot of other folks and and I can explain why that is and and people might protest that that
Sociologists economists demographers can be highly quantitative
political scientists as well and
You know really use advanced statistical computational methods
So why aren't they included in stem and I think that I
Think that that has a lot to do with what the government wants with its
Investments in stem education and they don't really want more of me. I arguably don't be offended. They probably don't want more cosmologists. Oh my god
Experts on general relativity, they're not saying we need more of those give us more of those they are looking for people to
You first of all fulfill employers demands and and these employers have been crying shortages
For quite a while. They want people to innovate. They want people, you know that technology that T that you were so skeptical of that's really what
That's what they care. Oh, I know that's yes, I think they're riding on my coattails. Honestly
they are they are and and they they have this hope that
By cranking out more experts in stem fields, they will innovate and
They will create new technologies that will boost American competitiveness and boost American national security
And grow the economy and provide jobs for everybody. I
wrote this
book chapter a few years ago in which I kind of traced the
the history of
American policymakers and what they wanted
I'm using the acronym anachronistically now what they wanted stem workers to do
Obviously, they weren't talking they weren't using the stem acronym during the progressive era
But during the progressive era is really when you saw the government trying to think about hey
We've got these experts in these science and engineering fields. We should deploy their expertise
And so the interesting thing about the progressive era was that they wanted to deploy the
Existing expertise if we can use existing in relation to expertise what people already knew
Uh-huh and and so like pure food the pure food act
Wow, we know why food spoils now. We know how to prevent food from spoiling. We know how to keep
Meat safe
Let's keep those let's use let's deploy that expertise and make sure that we can make food better
Progressives were real excited about, you know, all the new knowledge being generated and and they wanted to just deploy
to strategically as possible
then you had a
Sort of a change that happened during World War two which I'm sure you're familiar with with you know
the Manhattan Project and developing the nuclear bomb developing radar and
That was a little bit different in the sense that the government really wanted to deploy
Scientific and engineering expertise to create specific technologies that they really wanted
So they brought together a lot of experts and said hey, we want you to develop a system that can detect enemy aircraft
Or hey, we want you to come and develop a system that can produce a
Weapon that could potentially end this war the nuclear bomb
So it was very targeted use of expertise even though they didn't yet have the expertise
So you can see we're one step away from the progressive era
but by the Cold War we started to get into a
phrase that I I kind of called it alchemy because it suggested this sort of this hope that by putting stuff together
Something amazing would happen. It wasn't as rational and
And they didn't the government really didn't even have an idea of which fields we're gonna create the most innovations or the most
The most innovations that would create the most jobs or the innovations that would boost national competitiveness the most economic competitiveness
I'm talking about here. It was just the sense that by creating more people with STEM
educations
amazing things were gonna happen and
We don't know what
But amazing things are gonna happen just get them together kind of like Bell Labs
Maybe it was a little bit like that bring them together and amazing things are gonna happen and
in this in this
This kind of understanding of STEM education and STEM expertise it was
There was a lot of hope and faith kind of the faith and I like that
Use of the word faith. We normally connect that with religion, but it was almost like that
it was like wow these people are gonna save us and
Let's invest in them and let's make them go so techno optimism at an early
Yeah, yeah, that's yeah, that's a phrase that that's that's bounced around a lot in this
So so you've already implicitly answered this question a little bit
But I'm wondering since we're gonna be talking about STEM education and what happens to people who get STEM degrees
It to in what sense is this a job for sociologists to think about we haven't had that many
Sociologists on the show. We had a great talk with brokerington about offshore wealth management
But you know, we haven't really gone into you know enough to for the listeners who you know
I assume listen to nothing but the Minescape podcast to really get an idea about what sociologists do
So is this is are you doing mainstream sociology? Are you kind of branching out a little bit with this topic?
That's a great question
One of the reasons I went into sociology was that I see it as
The big picture social science. I I think that
Economists produce a lot of great knowledge. I think political scientists produce a lot of great knowledge
but I tend to
Think of the knowledge they produce especially economists as kind of looking through the world through a rolled-up piece of paper
You know, yeah
Creating that right now in my with my with my hands here and and you can see something you can focus on something really clearly
but you
Don't necessarily see all the different things that might be connected to that thing that you're really really focusing on right so
economists can
Can lead us astray sometimes in ways that I think if sociologists will more inclined to study some of the issues that economists focus on
You know, they might have provided a little bit of a corrective
so for example
The world is is filled right now with a lot of folks who are upset about free trade and how free trade
Produced a lot of economic dislocation people running losing their jobs people who used to work in manufacturing
Not having those jobs anymore those jobs have gone abroad
This should have been obvious and and and I think that the
Economists tend toward and sorry for any in the audience. I think they tend toward a kind of
really basic sort of utilitarianism and so, you know, they might think well, we might lose some
Manufacturing jobs, but overall we're gonna be happier because you can produce
televisions more cheaply in Mexico or China now these are gonna be cheaper for us to buy and
And and these workers can move like water
They'll just flow around to the places where the economic opportunities are and everyone's gonna be better off
But what they don't understand is that people have identities their identities are often linked to their jobs and
and so
they
They struggle with economic dislocation
so
Sociologists, I think can look at this big picture see all these things going on and that's kind of what I
Love to do. I often think of the knowledge that I do compared to the knowledge that you do or that you generate
I think of the kind of science that you do Sean is like vertically integrated like it's really really
deep and
And like if you are focused on a problem of general relativity, I just keep reading that up because I know you wrote the textbook on it
But and someone knocks on the door and like Sean we got to talk to you
Like you lose your concentration
The whole thing falls down. You're annoying and and then you got to get back into it
Whereas the stuff that I do and why it's hard to do this podcast just to give you a heads up
It's like horizontally integrated knowledge. It's a lot of stuff at a more superficial level, but really broad, right?
so I'm trying to understand, you know, investments and
education and what what employers in
Software and oil and gas and chemicals and biopharmaceuticals like all this stuff. It's just it's kind of at a superficial level
But there's a lot of it. Yeah, and and I I love that though
And I think it fits more with my undiagnosed
ADD, you know that it's easier for me to get back into it if someone knocks on the door because you know
There's a lot of different footholds I can grab on to rather than that really narrow one
Does that make sense to you and I'm talking about we did have herp gintis on the podcast
I don't know if you know his work. Yeah, it reminds me very much of that even though he self-identified as an economist
But game theory evolution physics it all came in and I absolutely
See the appeal of that. That's why I do a podcast rather than just sitting in my office writing papers
Right, right, right exactly. So the sociology when I when I when I looked at this issue
I got a little pushback from some some STEM workers themselves like who are you?
What are you doing? You're a sociologist. Why are you looking at this? I?
Would like to think I'm the guy yeah who can look at the big picture here
I can see things that you can't see I can bring together different
Different ideas different systems of thought that maybe you're not aware of and use those things to illuminate social reality
In in a unique way that actually adds some value that makes a contribution. All right
Well, we'll see over the next hour whether we do that
I
Put a lot of pressure on yeah, I know you really just set yourself up there better be amazing
So let's for people who are not professional sociologists are hanging out there with let's set the stage
You know we have people who get degrees in the stem and I guess the two questions
I want to ask you can address them in whatever order is
one
What kinds of jobs do they go into right like you know within academia?
We love it when people go into academic jobs and we imagine getting a PhD becoming professor
But you and I also know that's a small fraction of all the people who get degrees in these fields
And the other is you know, how does that compare to all the other?
Jobs like how what is a fraction of people when they go in the jobs? They say oh, this is a stem job versus
What management?
Factory jobs. I don't even know what the categories are
Right, so that's a good question the government talks about the policymakers in the US government
I know your audience is international talks about stem and non-stem as a binary, okay?
it's one or the other and
There's a few people who go beyond that but in general they talk about stem and non-stem jobs
And they do that because of that what I talked about before this this hope that by putting people into these stem occupations
The sort of traditional stem occupations software developer chemist biologists, you know things that you knew in high school as as science and
engineering electrical engineering mechanical engineering
That by by getting people into those occupations these amazing things are going to happen
In reality as I'm sure a lot of your listeners know stem and non-stem is more of a continuum
I spent a lot of time thinking about that it ended up getting cut from the book for various reasons
But it's definitely the case that there's a lot of there are a lot of jobs that in which stem expertise
College level stem expertise is very very helpful
So if you any of your listeners or listeners or software developers
They would almost certainly prefer a manager who understands software development
And so there's
A lot of people who get stem degrees do go into management
A lot of people who get stem degrees go into practicing medicine
Now the government does not
Consider practicing medicine to be a stem job. Really people might think yeah, they might think why is that what's going on?
It's because of this thing about trying to create innovation. Okay, and practicing medicine
Is does a lot of great things for people as obvious
Obvious for anyone who's ever been to a competent physician
But they typically do not innovate and create patents and jobs and things like that
We've got stem we got md phd's who might do that for the most part practicing medicine is it's about deploying existing expertise
And another area where where stem people with stem degrees will go that are not the traditional stem occupations is finance of various kinds
Very much. Yeah. No, we're we're we are
I know you're aware of
People in physics who went into quantitative finance and do some very high powered things there
The national science foundation data the national science foundation runs this great survey called the national survey of college graduates
And I relied on it a lot for this book
It shows that people go into this category of
Of you know accountants
Auditors financial specialists it tends to group them together. We don't know exactly what those folks are doing
It's probably not a lot of black souls equations and some of the stuff that our friends in on wall street do
But but so that's another area where folks go and then a lot of folks go into jobs that don't use stem expertise at all
And there's just too many to mention. It's hard to make generalizations
That it's a it's a very wide variety of potential occupations for people with with stem expertise
But I want to emphasize and I do in the book that when the government invests in stem occupy in stem education
They want people to go into
stem occupations
And I should say at the outset right here
that
About 50 percent of all stem workers in the united states
Are in computers in some way right like that. That's like that's like the 800 pound gorilla of stem
And we're talking software developers. That's one of the most in-demand in-demand jobs
You know computer engineers of various types people web developers
There's just a whole range of occupations that involve computers
and one of the things that's really unique about that particular stem sector is that
Whereas
chemical firms like duPont hires chemists
Trucking companies or shipping companies probably don't hire chemists
but
computer experts of various types
They're their own silo where tech companies will hire these folks
But then they're also yeah like a band across the economy
Where just about everybody hires some computer experts to you know, do things run their payroll do their logistics
I always think of trucking because we don't think of trucking as being very high tech
But actually they hire a lot of data people and to manage this whole complicated system
so
That computer related fields information technology is a band across the whole economy retail
You know all kinds of occupations or all kinds of sectors will use that
Life sciences that'll be used in bio pharma. You know all that you know life science kinds of sectors
so
computer is really the 800 pound gorilla and and so
when we talk about stem workers
People have commented on the book a little bit like they're saying hey, man
This book seems to be really about tech and really about computer workers
And there's two reasons for that
One is what I just told you that so many workers go into that field
And the other reason is that those are the employers who
argue
And complain the loudest about shortages. They're the ones who are saying hey, man, we need more workers. Where are these workers?
Where what what's wrong with your universities?
What's wrong with you society for not giving us more more stem grads so that we can hire them?
Well, that's good because that's exactly where I wanted to go next because
Is the feeling that we get within academia that the humanities are on the decline?
And stem majors are kind of taking over is that accurate and nevertheless?
There's a lot of companies that are complaining. We don't produce enough stem majors
Yeah, so I should say at the outset that you know, the book is really about this puzzle
We we haven't we I've been talking for quite a while here already and I haven't even gotten to the puzzle
We'll get there my apologies the puzzle the puzzle is that there's all these claims of the shortage of stem grads and
Only according to some measures and this is the census bureau only 28 percent of stem grads work in stem jobs
There's different ways of counting and different datasets. My counting is about 40 percent of stem grads work in stem jobs
So it's a little bit higher, but still a minority
So the puzzle is there's all these complaints about shortages what's going on
You know, why aren't you producing enough and yet it's the data looks like we're producing a surplus
So that's that's kind of the puzzle there
And is that for that that figure those figures that you quote one way or the other are they sort of
Lifetime like sometime 20 years ago 50 years ago. I got a stem degree and now I am or am not or is it right out of college
so basically what they do
Is the national survey of college graduates comes it comes out every couple years and they ask a sample of college graduates
What did you get your degree in? What are you doing now?
So it's a slice of people so it includes people right out of college and people who have been out for a while
But that's a great question because I was really interested in whether people kind of
Go in massive numbers into stem early on and then move on to something else
But there's there's a lot of data that suggests even in high demand fields like electrical engineering
that
Some data suggests upwards is 50 percent
Right out of college say nah, I'm not gonna I'm not gonna go the stem route. I'm gonna go do something else
So really it's a it's a leaky pipeline. That's a metaphor that's often used. You've probably heard that metaphor
It's a leaky pipeline that leaks at all stages
If if we think about stem as something important
In elementary school people lose interest there
High school college and then right out of college and then throughout their work lives people can
Exit this the stem pipeline
That's one of the things I really wanted emphasizing this book is that too many people studying this focus on the stem pipeline is just about
education from k through 16 k through college
But really
People have to keep and we can talk about this later. People have to keep their stem skills up to date
and
And stem education if if you want to be successful in stem you got to keep your skills up to date
Your education doesn't end at college. It doesn't end at a phd. You got to constantly
Re-up you got to constantly
I call it the stem skills treadmill. I apologize for the transparent attempt to create jargon
But I really wanted to capture something here, which is the idea of moving while standing in place
Right stem workers really have to keep moving. They really have to keep learning just to be able to keep their job
And um, I feel like I'm getting off
No, this is what I mean that is ultimately where we want to go
But that's okay because we can go back and forth. But just to like just to drive it home
It's okay to get the point halfway through the podcast. Um,
I
One gets the impression that a successful
undergraduate majoring in a stem field is going to come out of college thinking of themselves as
elite and well-trained, etc
But one of the messages of your book is it's exactly those people who the employers think of as basically cheap and disposable
Right, they're going to use them for a little while
Until their skills are not quite as cutting edge anymore
And they're not going to really mind if they just fire them in higher new graduates
Right. I I talked to a CEO of a of a stem
an innovation economy
sort of company and
they hired a lot of stem workers and
This CEO used the phrase that I title a chapter of the book burn and churn
And it was striking. He he said just so matter of factly. Yeah, we burn and churn through them
They have a lot of enthusiasm and we take advantage of that
And when their skills fall out of date or when they get kind of burned out
Then we hire some more and we there's other studies that show stem employers like to get new blood. They like to get
New folks coming in there like they like this churn
And so that's seen as as a positive and there's not that much concern about what happens to people who get burned out
There's a lot of research. It's it's funny because for years
I've advised students and maybe you have as well
to
To major in the field that you're passionate about, you know to choose a career that you think you can be passionate about
But leave it to the social scientists to find something negative about that
And there's there's new research mainly from my field in sociology
About how employers exploit this passion. They think wow, we've got these workers who really love this and let's
You know get them to work 60 70 hours a week
We don't even have to pay them extra because they're so passionate
They've had great teachers and professors who've fired their excitement about this field
and
Let's ride that wave until it crashes or peters out or something and and and maybe we can then hire the next
group of passionate workers
So what leads these companies to complain about a shortage? Is it just that they want even more cheap workers just out of college?
so I
I kind of played dumb in the book a little bit. I'm like, all right employers
You say that there's a shortage. I'm going to take that at face value
If there really is a shortage, are you behaving like there's a shortage?
Are you acting like stem grads are scarce and valuable and can just produce magic that's going to benefit all of us
Or are you treating these folks as?
as
as disposable
I I
There's a lot of good metaphors Sean that work here
One of the ones I think about is squeezing an orange getting that juice out of it
In my la times op-ed. I suddenly thought about fast fashion
Something that kind of works or that's like really great for a short time
But you don't expect it to last you move through it
And so that's what they do and I just kept believing them pretending to believe them and saying, all right
Let's see if your actions match your words
And they just really it just really doesn't the new york times has a headline today
It's I don't know if I can mention the date in in this but
But it could be almost any day
There's a there's a new round of layoffs at major major tech companies
These are the firms they they created this lobbying group called forward us
That their whole their whole reason for being is the idea of a stem shortage
their whole reason for being is
Lobbying the government for both more stem grads more stem education and also more stem migrants to come
And a lot of these companies and it's part of the reason I talk about these tech companies
they
They're rich, you know, I mean some of these are are
Are all near monopolies. We're talking google. We're talking amazon. We're talking
Well alphabet, you know, google is tedious. They changed their names facebook's now meta, but huge, you know, two billion people have facebook
They own instagram
Apple has like a billion dollars in cash
They're they layoff workers. Yeah, they you know, they just we're done with you guys. We don't know. We hired too many
Sorry, we don't need you guys anymore
I I met a guy who was a former
HR expert at a major tech company
And he had a brilliant idea and I'm not going to give him credit because he actually wanted to remain anonymous
But he moved into the education field like elementary education and high school education
And in that field for students with learning disabilities, there's this thing called the IEP
Which stands for individual education program or individualized education
Plan something like that, but the idea is
You have a student with some kind of learning disability. You monitor their progress
You figure out what their strengths are you figure out what they need to know
And and he thought that was a great model for these really rich tech companies
That are constantly complaining about shortages
If if it looks like and who's going to know better than the employers themselves if it looks like some skills are about to be obsolete
Why not tell these workers? Hey, you've already got this great foundation in STEM education
Your specialty is kind of going
Going down. We need something new. This looks like it's going to be the new thing
We're going to put a little bit of money in there and we're going to train you and deploy you somewhere else in the firm
They they typically don't do that
They they let you go
Google, um, I think it was google was
Basically told companies are told employees. You've got this many months to figure out
What skill you want to develop you're on your own to figure that out. How do you know?
How do you know what's going to be the next in-demand skill?
And so they moved into that, you know, they they were given the opportunity to move into that but without guidance or without
Without paid training. So that that's really tough
I gotta lay another metaphor on you and this came from someone
A STEM worker an engineer who emailed me after my my la times op-ed came out
And I loved you know, I love to get the the voices from the field. It's so interesting to hear their stories
This engineer told me that he thought stem work was was something like
Prospect prospecting and mining in the 1800s
And you've got these people who chase the chase the latest gold rush
We're gonna go do that thing. It's gonna be really hot for a while
Maybe some people are gonna get rich. Maybe some, you know, stem workers are gonna stock options
There's gonna be a lot of stem people are gonna get rich, but then it's gonna peter out
And then those folks got to find the next big thing
And this engineer told me he didn't want his children to go into these fields because
He said it gets tiring chasing these gold rushes
Chasing these, you know, the the next
The next mine to be exploited and and and just really really
You know people really dig into it, you know, I can give your your readers can probably think of examples
But blockchain was really huge for a while
AI is now the huge one
You know, it it goes up and down if you're in oil and gas, you know, the if the price of oil is super high
They're like, wow, we need more look at we can pay them a lot
And then suddenly that price plummets and then that goes down
For people in the life sciences, there could be some promising new
Technologies in life sciences like right now MRNA is really big
Maybe there's gonna be some limitations there gene editing really big
Might be some limitations there. We'll see but
You get these fields that get super hot
And then they try they hire a lot of folks if they don't get fda approval if the clinical trials don't work out
See you later
And and and life sciences will lay off a bunch of workers as well
Is is it possible to oversimplify your argument by saying that there might possibly be downsides to capitalism?
I would say
That the problem isn't necessarily capitalism per se the problem really is
And this is where I really put on my sociologist hat and I'm but I'm borrowing from some ideas that come from from economists as well
There are cultural practices
That characterize american capitalism, especially american capitalism
Today and certainly over the last few decades, which are creating this problem
and
there's a lot of folks who've written about this but
There's expectations that investors have that they didn't used to have
And that is that they
It they call it maximizing short-term
shareholder value various
permutations of that phrase various versions of that phrase
But shareholders like there's there's a whole movement to create this thing that that that the stakeholders who really matter
For a corporation are the shareholders not the employees
The shareholders not the customers
Not the customers as anyone who's tried to do customer service in almost any field
Any sector not the people in the regional economy where the company might be based
It's the shareholders and they should expect
Value on their investment in the short term
And there's a lot of complicated stuff about how this came about
there used to be these massive
conglomerates that are all these
diverse sort of
companies under one roof
underwear and apple pie
Sarah Lee owned Haynes
The Sarah Lee company you know like under underwear company like all these crazy things
Put together and they were doing that to hedge them
You know kind of hedge their bets if the apple pie market collapsed at least they can make some money on t-shirts
So, uh, but shareholders were like no no no we want you to do what you do find your core competency do that thing
It was a massive redefinition of what corporations were really about
And there was a redefinition of what workers were and workers became costs
And investors began to applaud
corporations that shed workers
This was a big shift, you know, you would always have companies that would lay off workers when the economy was bad
But by the 1980s as we got to shift to this maximizing short term shareholder value kind of approach to corporations
You got companies that shed workers even in good times
And and the stock price would go up
I
I give the example of Sarah Lee because it's just such a it's such a great example and and the and the ceo complained
You know that like my god, you know what the investors just want us to get rid of workers. That's what they want and
you know
investors
They don't like training in the united states, especially the europeans are better at investing in training than the american
american corporations are why
You know sociologists like to talk about training as investing
But investors see that as spending money
And why are you spending money on that when you should be maybe doing stock buybacks or something to boost the value of your stock?
So I wouldn't say it's capitalism. I would say it's this version of capitalism that we have right now
We have similar kinds of short-term expectations among venture venture capitalists
Which I think are very important
It drives them
To put their money into software at the expense of other industries, which I think we need very badly
In the book. I'm very transparent about what I want staff workers to do
I want them to save the planet. I really want them to develop clean energy better plastics
of
Carbon capture technologies. There's so many things we badly need
But investors want software
They love software
You know instagram was worth a billion dollars when it had 11
employees
Instagram was was software. Yeah, and and the reason investors love software is because
That is a from the from the perspective of investor. That's a fantastic investment
You can easily demonstrate the technology works
unlike
New battery technologies unlike things that we badly need like fusion energy
You know, there's some startups doing fusion energy. But boy, when are we going to get that?
Can we really demonstrate that that works?
With software you can pretty much show that it works pretty quickly
You don't need a factory to create it
Which is a major advantage. Yeah, if you don't need a factory, you don't need employees
You just need a few people to do the software
and
and and so
And then you can make massive amounts of money that the return on software investments are like
10 times much percentage higher than returns on clean energy, which is which is what I think we badly need
And so investors, you know, if they just keep blockchain
ai's the new ones that I mentioned but any kind of software fintech, you know
technology related to to finance social media
The surveillance capitalism, which is another very, you know, there's a term coined by shoshana zuboff
You know tracking us on the internet. Wow, we can sell you more things
And and not necessarily have to produce things. So we don't need factories
We don't have what investors call the valley of death where you kind of go from the the innovation to the actual
Manufacturing phase which can take a while making sure the prototype works and all that kind of stuff
so that's a long way to say
Capitalism is not the problem. I think it's the version of capitalism that we have right now
Okay, and there's probably like a whole other podcast
We could devote to how that version of capitalism came to be but I'll we'll stay a little bit focused here
Uh, and I do want to give you a chance to mention that
The fear of becoming obsolete and then getting fired is not the only thing that is
Keeping STEM grads slightly unhappy. I mean, there's the
Overwork
aspect there's other things where the grass isn't quite as green as they hoped it would be once you've gotten your
bachelors in electrical engineering and enter the job market
Yeah, so I I tend to think
Again taking at face value these employers that there are these dire shortages and it's a crisis and those are the words that they use
Take that at face value. Well, what are they doing? How are they treating these these STEM workers?
And one of the things that they do is they incentivize movements out of STEM
and they do that by
paying their managers more
And I I know you're an NBA basketball fan. I know you love
you love
The Sixers you've got your passions there. Do you still love the Sixers?
We had Daryl Mori as a guest on the podcast
Okay
uh, so
It's interesting because in professional sports
The players who have these scarce skills are paid more than the managers, right?
in
In STEM the managers are typically not always
typically paid more than the folks who have the skills that are supposedly scarce. Yeah, and
and
employers control wages
they can
They decide how much to pay their workers
This is an area where I I think sociologists have done a little bit better than the economists the
the economists
they have some theories about wages, but
understanding
The starting point of the wage. I don't think they've been very good at
And I think sociologists are a little bit better at this. I talked to the co of a tech company
I'm using an anecdote here
And he was telling me
We need more we need more user experience designers the folks who design the interface of the software that we're using right now
and
And I don't want to pay them what they're demanding
And and he showed me there's these there's these services that kind of do surveys of how much people are paying
People in different fields including user experience designers and he's saying look at how much they make
I don't want to pay them more than this. That's a sociological kind of dynamic
It's called it's you know isomorphism is the jargony thing
But you know, we want to look like we're doing what other folks are doing
We don't want to be someone who pays their user experience designer too much
this this
This uh, this guy decided I can't find people here to do it. I'm going to outsource this job
So he went around the world
Eastern Europe, China, Mexico
India looking for cheaper user experience designers
Until he found some that he thought were competent and he could pay them less so
And then that's you know, the more that kind of thing takes off the
The less you incentivize people to move into that field in the united states and the more you become dependent on outsourcing that thing
but but a big argument that I make in the book is that
There's a lot of self-inflicted wounds here if indeed there is there is scarcity and the decision to pay your stem workers less than their managers
And to incentivize movements out of stem which not every firm does but it's very common
It's one of it's one of the problems in this area
well and
there is also the idea that
Because there truly are so many stem graduates that these employers can hire
That they can kind of abuse them once they're there, right that they can kind of give them overtime. Uh, there's these
Schedules that are invented to hit targets and really crush people
And it can be it can be kind of uh, soul-destroying to just toil away this job for a few years before you get outdated
I I think that that's exactly right. Sean and I I rely
pretty heavily on
to kind of explore the detail of this a
ethnography an ethnography by a sociologist named ofer charon
I want to give him a shout out because I think he did such great work where he spent some time at a
big tech company he had to keep it anonymous
but it's a it's a major tech company that that folks know and that is
you know has deep pockets it has a lot of money and
Boy, they work their workers really hard and and he he kind of captured this thing and I
I actually use this for my in my intro to sociology class to kind of in my sociology of work to talk about
Again, the sort of social scientists making everything seem bad
But even these jobs that are supposedly great even these jobs that looks that look fun
And the media image of some of these STEM jobs is
people playing foosball people playing ping pong
There was a STEM employer here in san diego that had this big swirly slide in the atrium
of their of their workplace
Uh
This ofer charon went to this company and saw that people didn't really use this stuff
That it looked like a lot of fun stuff was around but people didn't use it and that was because for much of the year
These workers were in what they call crunch mode or crunch time
And that is the time when they're racing to deliver a product that has been
promised at a for for a delivery date at a particular time
And they've got to make sure that it works
and they've
They've start working
He found workers worked an average of 67 hours a week
That's a long time. Yeah
And and they and they did it
Sort of voluntarily the the managers have these clever ways of managing workers to
If they didn't come with the passion to sort of coax the passion out of them or make them behave as if they're passionate
It's these pretty bruising performance reviews
Where every worker is ranked. It's it's called stacked ranking or forced ranking
Sometimes it's called
cynically rank and yank
Where you rank up the workers and you yank out the ones that are ranked in a low in a low position
But the workers themselves choose their hours and they choose the hours
Based on this idea that they want to impress their manager
So the manager might go to them and say hey, we got us this product. We want to deliver. We want it to have this and that capability
We need someone to do this particular aspect of this software for example
and
Do you think you could do it and how long do you think it'll take you?
And they want a high ranking. They want a high evaluation for their performance evaluation
So they kind of over promise or they certainly promise very ambitiously
Because if they say uh, that looks hard. Oh, I don't know about that
Maybe you should dial down your expectations
That manager is going to think I don't know if I want this guy
I mean the obvious analogies to graduate school cannot have missed your notice
Yes, yeah, there's
There's
There's definitely a lot of analogies to to graduate school. You were absolutely right
My mind is racing right now with some of them, but trying to stay focused here. So
So what you have is workers
seemingly voluntarily taking on these excessive hours and then
Working themselves very very hard
One one software developer compared it to drinking out of a fire hose
Just trying to keep up with all the stuff that's going on
And and developing the skills that they need
Maybe they promise something that involves a skill that they don't have yet
So they got to work to develop that and and that stuff is very difficult and one of the things that
Maybe some of your listeners are familiar with. I know some of the some of the stem workers with whom I've spoken are familiar with this
It's often a young person's game and and part of that there's there's reasons for that one of them is that
Some young people kind of realize wow, I'm going to have to keep my skills up to date all the time
That's going to be hard and I can do this for a little while
But I kind of burn out and then I move on to something else
The other thing is that older workers often have families and if you have families
They take time unfortunately
Maybe that's fortunate. That's okay. It's not it's not
It's it's something it's a job that you have to do
and
And it doesn't go away and and these workers
They have a they have a second shift at home
if they're not shunting that off onto a spouse
And and it gets harder and harder to self-train in your in your in your own
Your own time and so it just create it creates more and more stress
So these these deadlines happen and and and it does put a lot of pressure on on workers. And again, this might sound very
Softwarey very tech focused, but but those are the employers who
Say their shortages those are the employers who often are the richest those are the employers getting all this investment from investors
And if there's any place where we would expect STEM workers to be treated really great
It should be these employers and and I don't think we see that and there is there's a point you make in the book
and I wasn't sure whether this was
in your mind more aspirational or factual but the
Idea that a lot of there's some idealism in the young STEM workers
They want to or they should want to I'm not sure
make the world a better place and
That turns out not to be the most lucrative job opportunity the making a world a better place kind of fields
Yeah, so this is where I was able to
Explore some of the issues. I was a double major in sociology and philosophy
And I've always been interested like you in the meaning of life. What is this all for?
I don't get much
Opportunity to really study that but in the last chapter of the book
I wanted to really explore this question of STEM education for what?
what are we
What are we as a society hoping to get with these innovations that STEM workers are producing
And I think that some STEM workers and and I want to be really clear about this
I'm sure there's some very very happy STEM workers who are listening to this right now
I hope they're still listening and they're thinking I love my job. I'm not working 70 hours a week
This is fantastic. I'm making tons of money. I can retire early. There are those folks. I'm talking about the aggregate
And there are folks who are really excited to be working on interesting STEM problems
Regardless of what it is
Some some STEM workers are
And I admire them. They're kind of pure scientists in a way. They love
particular ways of thinking and so they could move from
cosmology or astrophysics into data science and predictive algorithms and things like that thinking
I
There's a guy I I don't know if he ended up in the book
I may have
I may have had him in there. I may have cut him out
But he was an astrophysics major who couldn't get a job or decided not to get a job in academia
And then he worked for a clothing retailer
That needed experts in AI and machine learning and that sort of thing so that they could
Give
customers
Suggestions of new clothes to buy
Okay, now very I would find that to be
Kind of soul-destroying to go from thinking about general relativity to be thinking about how can I get someone to buy things that they don't need
Yeah, but but from a pure science standpoint from the pure complexity of problem standpoint
Some folks can make that transition
But not everybody right and so there's a literature in
sociology and management and psychology
About how some jobs can produce moral stresses or even moral injuries
Anyone who's seen at at their workplace workplace bullying
That you know, they might have felt a moral stress
If they've known that their employer is someone at their job is embezzling that could create create a moral stress
But what I was interested in the last chapter of the book asking stem education for what?
Are the stem workers who are uncomfortable morally?
with the business model of their of their firm
And it's it's easy to pick on social media
But it's easy to pick on social media because there's a lot of evidence that social media produces a lot of social harms
And so I quote some workers at at facebook
Who've said facebook is hurting?
people at scale
another worker another worker more
more
Graphically said I feel like I have blood on my hands
For facebook's role in promoting disinformation and promoting political conflict in societies other than the united states
Other people have said well to actually promote conflict in the united states
there's new research coming out
about
Rises in depression, especially teen depression, especially teen girls pretty effective and
And there's studies are convincing. Yeah
there's there's evidence that
suggests
Hard to prove these things definitively causal inferences are very difficult in social science
But there's evidence that suggests social media use is part of the reason we're seeing
Very alarming rises in teen depression
So, you know, some stem workers can think oh, we're doing interesting things
Analytically these are exciting problems to solve. I'm working with smart people. They can get really jazzed about that
Other workers can kind of think
When I go home at night, I don't feel good about what I'm doing here. Yeah, um, you know, they're even like
I don't know if any
I don't know if any of your you or any of your listeners have kind of gone on these youtube rabbit holes
Where you start watching a video and then youtube saying what about this one? What about this one?
How about that one you like that check out this one?
and they they tend to
Lead you into more extreme content or more
shocking or emotionally
provocative content
there's a phrase
Engagement equals enragment or maybe you could reverse it enragment equals engagement, but the idea is
getting this emotional hook into the users by
outraging them
Is a way to get them to use the app longer?
and so
you know
Google the google owns
Alphabet owns google google owns youtube
They're involved in this stuff as well
Very rich company using using different technologies to get people
Very upset and you could imagine workers not being happy with this. Well before you
Defended capitalism a little bit saying that there's a particular type of capitalism which we've evolved to and and I
I appreciate the benefits of capitalism in in certain circumstances markets are good at solving certain problems
But a lot of what you're describing really just sounds like
Capitalism that's gotten better at being efficiently
Capitalistic because of faster information flows and faster decisions and more scales and
wider labor markets and things like that whereas
As a globe as a species we produce a lot. We produce abundance
And and do we need to think radically it's late in the podcast
This is where we let to you know get to speculate a little bit
So do we need to think more radically about the system that lets this all happen?
I actually don't think we need to think more radically about it. I think that
we have the tools available now to
Get more out of our investments in STEM education than we are getting now
One of the things we could do is create more incentives for
Innovators in the fields that we desperately need
I often think, you know, if if we're all made extinct by climate change or something like that
And you know when alien civilization comes down and they look at us and they think well
What were you guys investing in
When the planet was falling apart and there were pandemics and the signs were all around you that you were in big trouble
And if we say cryptocurrency blockchain AI
surveillance economy, you know
It's going to look a little silly
so
I think some intervention is needed, but not a radical change
So one of the things we could do is create more government incentives in investment in clean energy
Better plastics that don't
To don't create micro nanoplastics that are in our bodies and human breast milk
incredibly
Forever chemicals that we don't know what are doing with us. We can create
We can create incentives through tax
rebates or tax incentives to make these movements happen the inflation reduction act
Which is a very general name for a very big bill did create these incentives and it's created stakeholders who are are
Moving into the clean energy space. So one thing you can do is create incentives for more of the investments we need
That'll produce more opportunities for stem workers to deploy their skills in ways that might feel morally
resonant with them
And another thing you can do is simply
Make illegal
Some uses of stem skills. There's there's a lot of debate in among legal experts about whether
Targeted advertising should just be banned
So that you remove the incentive for these companies to endlessly find ways to
To surveil their all of us on the internet because if they can't do this targeted advertising
Then they don't have an incentive to do that anymore. So you can legislate things away
and then
another thing you could do is just think about
Moral limits on investors and and business models, you know
Cannabis is legal in my state of cal of california
But my understanding is the cannabis business is a little shaky because banks are a little nervous working with those folks
There's there's this kind of sense that they're sort of cordoned off like whoa, you guys are a little bit different
um
I hesitate to use this word, but pornography is a very lucrative field
That's also kind of like, whoa, we don't want to invest in that, you know, we don't really want to be a part of that
So we already have moral limits that shape investor behavior and and what people are willing to
spend their time on in terms of business practices and investing
but for some reason
it's okay to
Take away people's privacy to stoke division and conflict to encourage
Disinformation the spread of disinformation in society
A lot of things that you might argue are more harmful than cannabis
You know are okay for investors to invest in you know mass layoffs, which disrupt families
There's a lot of things that investors tolerate right now
Which perhaps they shouldn't perhaps a little more moral education
Could could go a ways here as well, you know, I'm not a cannabis guy, but I was an online poker player
And uh, it it used to be done by many many people and the government swooped in one friday and seized all their assets
And uh, really basically can't play poker online now
Certain states you can but it used to just be all over and and I agree
That's a lot less harmful than some of the things you just mentioned
Yeah, so there's there's research that suggests that
you can
You can tweak capitalism. You can you can fix it and which in ways that will generate
The productive energies the innovation the riches the capitalism that can produce and minimize some of the harms that we that we see
Well, I don't quite so the thing that I'm still missing though is
The innovation disrupting
The kinds of jobs that people grew up having you know if if if as is plausible
The rate of innovation and and which skills are relevant is
Increasing the rate so it's faster now
We're always going to have a an issue where people who hit 50 are no longer valued and that that does seem a bit harder to solve
I'm not quite sure how to do it
Yeah, so
The the national survey of college graduates. They they asked this broad range of of of college graduates
Did they take skills related training in the past year or two and
and
We looked at the time since their degree and about 60 percent have taken skills related training in stem
Up to 30 years after their degree
So we're getting into the 50s. It starts to go down when we're getting into getting into people's 60s
So you're absolutely right that that is an issue. So one of the things that we need to do is
I don't like this phrase Sean because it sounds so 1970s
The lifelong learning we we have this model of education
That you graduate
in your early 20s, and then you're gone
and
And I really think we need to change that we're in a different era now
And we need a model where we think of college as a place you return to
periodically
for skills updating or
A rescaling something in a different area altogether when your skills become obsolete
Maybe something like a subscription model or something where you can go back to your alma mater or a different university
But this expectation that we have of college is something you do when you're young and then you move on
Maybe needs to be changed a little bit
I I still think that college education is absolutely essential for creating
But I would I like to think of as foundational skills the basic skills that a college graduate has
One of the things is to learn how to learn
PhD training really makes you good at that
But even with the bachelor's you kind of learn how to learn you can discern good knowledge from bad knowledge
You learn how to sort of sort through
what's what's good and bad and in in
Trying to find the skills that you might need or the knowledge you might need
But you'll have that core foundation
But then on top of that the skills that you actually deploy at work might change many times throughout your career
So I would argue and I'm working on a book on this with a colleague right now
College education is great for that foundation
But circling back to
College to get a skills updating not for another degree
but kind of a short-term certificate
kind of
Very specific narrow kind of skill that can be deployed now might be something that many people will have to do
Repeatedly throughout their careers. I mean I am course of course. I'm very much in favor of lifelong learning
I do wonder though about the model because
What is that a very different life stage at age 40 than age 20 right when you're 20 not only you're learning it for the first time
But there's a certain freedom to fail because your obligations are relatively low
But once you have a kid and mortgages and things like that
And also you've been happy for the last 20 years doing some job. I mean I I'm in favor of efficiency
But I feel the human cost of having to say I need to do something different than what I've been doing before
Yeah, I agree with that. But the reality is
The reality is upon us. You are gonna have to do something different. There was a great study that was done
You know, social scientists love a natural experiment where something happens and you can
Something happens that's rare and you could
examine how human beings respond to it
so Steve Jobs decided that the
iPhone was no longer going to support adobe flash software right said, you know what?
We're not going to do adobe flash anymore. We're going to use something else
And there were a lot of software experts
On adobe flash not necessarily employed by adobe, but that was what they did
Suddenly that was gone. Yeah, they had to respond. So that reality is already there
Where the where a skill that
Has maybe been developed over a few years
It's just no longer needed
and
So that reality is already there. So how are we as a society gonna gonna deal with the
the regular obsolescing of technical skills and
You're right. It's definitely hard
People's identities get wrapped up in their jobs
and
And they their their skill sets get get, you know
More and more fine-tuned and then to lose that can be really tragic, especially as you say if they have a family
So that's going to be difficult. I think if
If shareholders don't punish companies for investing in the training of their workers, especially the richest companies
And for investing in their workers, that should be something that's encouraged and applauded
I got to tell you I don't want to go off the subject too much here
But google invests a lot of money in schools
They they give away chromebooks to students
They do a lot of things to get to train the next generation of software developers at that stage
But they could do more for their incumbent workers. Yeah
You know, that that's the odd thing and so social scientists
They they talk about corporate social responsibility and some things are done kind of as corporate branding, you know
Like look how good we are. We give away this money. Some of it's done to kind of create market share
Let's get a bunch of people using chromebooks and they're gonna love google
So there's there's money that's being spent in this area
But I would argue they could do more for their incumbent workers to manage these sometimes
Sometimes very difficult to navigate
Uh career changes or job skill changes later in life
Maybe maybe as a final thought we can be more idealistic ourselves because uh, of course
We want people to get
lucrative
Rewarding jobs that they can have in some level of security throughout their career
But that's not the only reason to get an education, right?
When people ask me about applying to graduate school in physics
My line is typically that you probably you will probably go in hoping to be a professor
You probably will not succeed at being a professor
But getting a phd in physics is actually an intrinsically good thing. You'll you'll be able to do something else
You'll learn a lot of skills, etc
I don't feel the same way about being a postdoc, but that's a different conversation
But you know, where does that fit in to this conversation?
Just the idea that getting a degree in STEM or related fields, you know has some value
Whatever your future life trajectory turns out to be
So I've seen that argument and
I appreciate your honesty when you tell people that the odds are
The odds are they will end up doing something different, right?
Then I think that's an important message to give them
Say yes, this is a great thing to do. You're going to get some very important skills
But keep an open mind for developing
Keep an open mind toward career trajectories that don't look like physics, right? So one of the
One of the disturbing findings I had in some research with a colleague when we looked at the national survey of college graduates
And we looked at people with STEM degrees who went into non-stem jobs
Is they were significantly less likely to report being satisfied with their jobs
overall
and interestingly
They were significantly less likely to be satisfied with the intellectual challenge of their jobs
interesting
so
A little bit less or they're less satisfied. They seem to be a little bit more likely to be bored
I don't feel so great about that
and
and so
You know being honest with people and telling them. Hey, there's a good chance. You'll be doing something else
I would encourage folks to develop a broad range of skills through
We've got this I call it STEM mania in the book at my university Sean University, California, San Diego
It's it's sort of like a public caltech. I always thought of it as that it's it's really STEM focused
It was born
It's it isn't send you because that's where the script since student oceanography was and that sort of stem tone
really kind of dominates the university
And the students who major in the humanities and social scientists are social sciences other than economics
regularly have to defend themselves to the
They're they're the stem the stem majors who are like, what are you going to do with that? What's wrong with you?
This is crazy
And so this will sound self-serving
But I tell my stem majors who do take sociology classes
It is important to get a broad range of skills skills related to
communication written oral critical thinking outside of technical skills
because
Chances are you're going to move into something outside of stem or sort of stem adjacent
And and and college is a time to really develop that that broad range of skills
I mean you always had that I mean you really always stood out your double major in philosophy and astronomy as I recall
Yeah, so you always had that message, but that's not typical
And so you could segue into this whole podcast thing and you know this this whole range of
Stuff that you do because of that undergraduate training
I'm trying to make a world of little miniature Sean Carroll's
So that they will have that
Flexibility to plug into different places in the economy stem expertise is great to have
I I would think the best thing that you could have to prepare yourself for the workplace of tomorrow is stem skills and
non-stem skills foundational sorts of skills like like like you have
Yeah, I mean you're not going to get any argument from me that the broad base is important
But if it's true that people who get stem degrees
report
dissatisfaction with their jobs once they get them
What are the data about humanities degrees or social science degrees?
No one cares about them. So I I didn't have a grant to look at them. I didn't really look at those folks
There are I I initially wanted to explore this there are
Pretty significant percentage
Different studies have different percentages, but a good 15 percent, you know of stem workers don't have stem degrees
and so you have folks
excuse me
You have folks who majored in humanities sort of subjects and they moved into technical fields
One of the great things about software development is it's a field that's pretty porous
You don't it's not like electrical engineering. It's hard to break into electrical engineering
Life sciences without those degrees
But software is is wonderfully porous you can you can be this sort of kid who worked on a computer in high school
Went and got I actually have a friend of mine who was a creative writing major
But he tinkered with computers in high school. He developed some some software
Sold it to a major software company did really well
Even though his major was creative writing
So software is is is really welcoming to people
You can do these boot camps where you get your foundational skills in writing and communication
Then you do a boot camp encoding or data data analytics or something
Then you can plug into the stem economy that way
So that's definitely something that that you that you can do
So I I applaud those folks, but for the most part people are not
Worried or valorizing our humanities majors
And so
And and I don't want to say we need to treat our stem majors and our stem our stem grads better than the other grads
but
If we say that there's shortages of stem grads if we say that stem grads are so important for the economy
We should at least treat these weeks these folks really well
And and hopefully treat everybody really well, but at least these folks who were constantly saying are so important and in such
Short supply. Well, okay. I like your final message, which is everyone should major in creative writing. I think that's a very
Wonderful world going forward. So it's John Scranton. Thanks so much for being on the mindscape podcast
Thanks, Sean. It was great to be here and you know, I just want to end with one thing
I've listened to podcasts before where people know the interviewer the host of the podcast
And they tediously kind of say, oh, we had also many great times in the past
You can cut this out my friend
But probably not many listeners know that you were a double threat on the basketball court
Not another no that you had an a sweet jump shot from the outside
I still remember the sound of the ball going through the net and nothing but the sound of that
And you had a you had a pretty good drive to the to the hoop as well
If someone covered you too close to the three-point line, you could blow by him
So not many not many of your listeners may know that about you
But that's definitely you were a multifaceted skilled guy and still are sorry to use the past tense
You must remember that that lefty hookshot was so annoying to everyone else yours
That like so many people, you know complained about it that you started complaining about them complaining about it because they weren't used to a lefty
That's that's right. But if everyone expects a right-handed jump shot
Then the left-handed hook is gonna is gonna is gonna keep me keep me going for quite a while something to remember
Thanks very much, John. Okay. Thanks, Sean
You